# RBAC - API flow

> NOT generated by AI. These are my study notes.

### 1. Starting app - ONE single time.

1. **main.ts** - Bootstrap everything:
   - Creates the NestJS app,
   - Configures `ValidationPipe`,
   - Enables CORS,
   - Starts server at 3000.

2. **app.module.ts** - Root module:
   - Loads `ConfigModule` (with env vars),
   - Registers all other modules,
   - Registers global guards globales in order: `JwtAuthGuard`, and then `PermissionsGuard`.

3. **Decorators (@RequirePerms, @Public)** - Executed ONCE:
   - At compilation time,
   - Stores metadata in the controller methods with `SetMetadata`,
   - This metadata is stored IN-MEMORY as a simple map.
   - Never executed again.

4. **roles.config.ts** - Roles and permissions config
   - Defines role-permission relations (`ROLE_PERMISSIONS`),
   - Defines the `Perm` enum to avoid typos,
   - Loaded in memory ONE single time.

### 2. Flow per HTTP Request (every single time).

1. `JwtAuthGuard` (first global guard)
- **O(1)**,
- Reads metadata with `reflector.getAllAndOverride()` to check if it has `@Public`,
- If public, returns true and exits; otherwise, delegates to `passport-jwt` to check the JWT,
- `passport-jwt` validates the JWT sign.

2. `JwtStrategy.validate()` (check if it's a valid JWT)
- **O(n)**,
- Executed once PER request,
- Gets the payload from JWT (sub, name, permissions[]),
- **Key:** Converts from array to Set (this is the O(n) part):
  ```typescript
  permissionSet: new Set<string>(payload.permissions)
  ```
- This Set is now attached to the `request.user` and it's reused in the next guard.

3. `PermissionsGuard` (secong global guard)
- **O(n)**,
- Reads metadata with `reflector.getAllAndOverride()` to get the required permissions,
- If not required permissions, returns true (it's public then),
- Gets `permissionSet` from `request.user` (already a Set),
- Verifies with `required.every(p => permSet.has(p))`
  - `every()` loops through the required permissions: O(n),
  - `Set.has()`, O(1) per verification,
  - Total: O(n × 1) = O(n).
- In practice, n is small (1-3 permissions per endpoint).

4. Controller and service
- Can read the `request.user.sub` to get `userId`,
- Executes business logic,
- Returns.